WSL2: Improve hosts management on Windows side, fixes #4482 (#4553)
drud/ddev: docs/content/users/install/ddev-installation.md

    Windows WSL2 is the best way to run DDEV and your web components. It’s Linux, which means a different experience for some Windows users. It’s Ubuntu Linux by default as described here, so it’s worth taking a little time to explore how Ubuntu and Bash work, including standard system commands and installation and upgrade procedures.

    ### Things You Need to Know about WSL2 and DDEV

    * **WSL2 is the recommended installation method for all Windows users.** All Windows 10/11 editions (including Windows 10 Home) support WSL2. The performance is way, way faster in every way, and you're less likely to have obscure Windows problems if you use WSL2.
    * WSL2 Projects go in `/home`, not on the Windows filesystem. Make sure you put your projects in the Linux filesystem (e.g. `/home/<your_username>`), **not** in the Windows filesystem (`/mnt/c`), because you’ll get vastly superior performance on the Linux filesystem. If you put your project in `/mnt/c` you will not get the benefits of WSL2.

>     * WSL2 hostname management: DDEV attempts to manage custom hostnames via the Windows-side hosts file (usually `C:\Windows\system32\drivers\etc\hosts`) rather than the hosts file inside WSL2. It can only do this if DDEV (with sudo.exe) is installed and in the `$PATH` on the Windows side. (DDEV inside WSL2 uses `ddev.exe` on the Windows side as a proxy to update the Windows hosts file.) If `ddev.exe --version` shows the same version as `ddev --version` you're all set up. Otherwise, install DDEV on Windows using `choco upgrade -y ddev` or by downloading and running the Windows installer. (The scripts below install DDEV on the Windows side, so you won't need to do anything if you've used one of those to install.) (If the Windows escalation happens to often to you, you can calm it down with `gsudo.exe  cache on` and `gsudo.exe config CacheMode auto`, see [gsudo docs](https://github.com/gerardog/gsudo#credentials-cache).

Reviewer: This one’s much harder to whittle down, and one of the reasons Windows should have its own page and/or a section in [How DDEV Works](https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/stable/users/basics/architecture/). It really is a different beast, and it seems like it’d be intimidating for a newcomer—like the usual barrier of understanding containerized environments compounded by this miraculous Linux-in-Windows phenomenon.

I did what I could with this:

```suggestion
    * Custom hostnames are still managed on the Windows side, not within WSL2.  
      DDEV attempts to manage custom hostnames via the Windows-side hosts file, usually at `C:\Windows\system32\drivers\etc\hosts`. It can only do this if DDEV (with `sudo.exe`) is installed and in the Windows-side `$PATH`. (DDEV inside WSL2 uses `ddev.exe` on the Windows side as a proxy to update the Windows hosts file.) If `ddev.exe --version` shows the same version as `ddev --version` you’re all set up. Otherwise, install DDEV on Windows using `choco upgrade -y ddev` or by downloading and running the Windows installer. (The WSL2 scripts below install DDEV on the Windows side, taking care of that for you.) If the Windows escalation happens too often to you, you can calm it down by running `gsudo.exe cache on` and `gsudo.exe config CacheMode auto`, see [gsudo docs](https://github.com/gerardog/gsudo#credentials-cache).
```

But I still have questions:

1. “It can only do this if DDEV (with `sudo.exe`) is installed”—can this be more clear? Did we install DDEV’s binary using `sudo.exe`? Do I need to install DDEV and another app called `sudo.exe`? I have no idea what this actually means. (And I’m Windows-incompetent, so sorry if this should have been obvious!)
2. DDEV attempts to manage custom hostnames on the Windows side, but what happens if its attempt fails? What am I risking if I ignore this bullet point? (This may be a topic for another page where it’s not in the way of installation instructions.)
3. What is the “Windows escalation”? As a reader at this point I’m looking at installing DDEV, presumably for the first time, and that’s not a phrase that’s been used previously and certainly not something I would have run into yet.
4. This is a hefty bullet point, and it seems to me that I can mostly ignore it if I’m using one of the WSL2 installers and/or my `ddev.exe --version` and `ddev --version` versions match. Is this all relevant and essential to someone that’s about to install DDEV via WSL2?

Author: Thanks for the questions!
1. The reality is sudo is installed with DDEV, so this can be simpler. Just say "DDEV installed on Windows side"
2. If attempt fails you get a simple error message that explains the situation. Maybe not as simple as we'd hope.
3. "Windows escalation" should be "Windows UAC Escalation", which is where the big screen comes up in windows and asks if it's OK to do. 
4. I agree this is not particularly important if using the script to install. But this is a massive improvement to some people's WSL2 experience, a problem that has existed since we first started WSL2 support... and as we see here... it introduces its own complexity.

    The WSL2 install process involves:

    * Installing Chocolatey package manager (optional).
    * One time initialization of mkcert.
    * Installing WSL2 and installing a distro like Ubuntu.
    * Optionally installing Docker Desktop for Windows and enabling WSL2 integration with the distro (if you're using the Docker Desktop approach).
    * Installing DDEV inside your distro; this is normally done by running one of the two scripts below, but can be done manually step-by-step as well.

    ### WSL2 + Docker CE Inside Install Script

    This scripted installation prepares your default WSL2 Ubuntu distro and has no dependency on Docker Desktop. It is designed to be able to run multiple times without breaking anything.

    The provided `PowerShell.exe` (original PowerShell 5) script can do most of the work for you, or you can handle these things manually. 

    In all cases:
    
    1. Install WSL2 with an Ubuntu distro.

        * Install WSL with 
            ```
            wsl --install`
            ```

>         * Reboot if required (it's usually required).

Reviewer: Each thought can stand on its own:

```suggestion
        * Reboot if required. (Usually required.)
```

=== "Windows"

    ## Windows

    You can install DDEV on Windows three ways:

    1. [Using WSL2 with Docker inside](#wsl2-docker-ce-inside-install-script)
    2. [Using WSL2 with Docker Desktop](#wsl2-docker-desktop-install-script)
    3. [Installing directly on traditional Windows](#traditional-windows) with an installer

    **We strongly recommend using WSL2.** While its Linux experience may be new for some Windows users, it’s worth the performance benefit and common experience of working with Ubuntu and Bash.

    ### Important Considerations for WSL2 and DDEV

    * WSL2 is supported on Windows 10 and 11.  
      All Windows 10/11 editions, including Windows 10 Home support WSL2.
    * WSL2 offers a faster, smoother experience.  
      It’s vastly more performant, and you’re less likely to have obscure Windows problems.
    * Projects should live in the Linux filesystem.  
      WSL2’s Linux filesystem (e.g. `/home/<your_username>`) is much faster, so keep your projects there and **not** in the slower Windows filesystem (`/mnt/c`).
    * Custom hostnames are managed via the Windows hosts file, not within WSL2.  

>       DDEV attempts to manage custom hostnames via the Windows-side hosts file, usually at `C:\Windows\system32\drivers\etc\hosts`. It can only do this if DDEV is installed and in the Windows-side `$PATH`. (DDEV inside WSL2 uses `ddev.exe` on the Windows side as a proxy to update the Windows hosts file.) If `ddev.exe --version` shows the same version as `ddev --version` you’re all set up. Otherwise, install DDEV on Windows using `choco upgrade -y ddev` or by downloading and running the Windows installer. (The WSL2 scripts below install DDEV on the Windows side, taking care of that for you.) If the Windows UAC escalation happens too often to you, you can calm it down by running `gsudo.exe cache on` and `gsudo.exe config CacheMode auto`, see [gsudo docs](https://github.com/gerardog/gsudo#credentials-cache).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      DDEV attempts to manage custom hostnames via the Windows-side hosts file—usually at `C:\Windows\system32\drivers\etc\hosts`—and it can only do this if it’s installed on the Windows side. (DDEV inside WSL2 uses `ddev.exe` on the Windows side as a proxy to update the Windows hosts file.) If `ddev.exe --version` shows the same version as `ddev --version` you’re all set up. Otherwise, install DDEV on Windows using `choco upgrade -y ddev` or by downloading and running the Windows installer. (The WSL2 scripts below install DDEV on the Windows side, taking care of that for you.) If you frequently run into Windows UAC Escalation, you can calm it down by running `gsudo.exe cache on` and `gsudo.exe config CacheMode auto`, see [gsudo docs](https://github.com/gerardog/gsudo#credentials-cache).
```

    * WSL2 is not the same as Docker Desktop’s WSL2 engine.  
      Using WSL2 to install and run DDEV is not the same as using Docker Desktop’s WSL2 engine, which itself runs in WSL2, but can serve applications running in both traditional Windows and inside WSL2.

    The WSL2 install process involves:

    * Installing Chocolatey package manager (optional).
    * One time initialization of mkcert.
    * Installing WSL2 and installing a distro like Ubuntu.
    * Optionally installing Docker Desktop for Windows and enabling WSL2 integration with the distro (if you're using the Docker Desktop approach).
    * Installing DDEV inside your distro; this is normally done by running one of the two scripts below, but can be done manually step-by-step as well.

    ### WSL2 + Docker CE Inside Install Script

    This scripted installation prepares your default WSL2 Ubuntu distro and has no dependency on Docker Desktop. It is designed to be able to run multiple times without breaking anything.

>     The provided `PowerShell.exe` (original PowerShell 5) script can do most of the work for you, or you can handle these things manually. 

Author: ```suggestion
    The provided PowerShell script can do most of the work for you, or you can handle these things manually. (This script works with the built-in PowerShell v5, but not with the newer v7.)
```

    In all cases:
    
    1. Install WSL2 with an Ubuntu distro.

        * Install WSL with 
            ```
            wsl --install`
            ```

        * Reboot if required. (Usually required.)

>         * Visit the Microsoft Store and install the *updated* "Windows Subsystem for Linux" and click "Open". It will likely prompt you for a username and password for the Ubuntu WSL2 instance it creates.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        * Visit the Microsoft Store and install the *updated* ["Windows Subsystem for Linux"](https://apps.microsoft.com/store/detail/windows-subsystem-for-linux/9P9TQF7MRM4R) and click "Open". It will likely prompt you for a username and password for the Ubuntu WSL2 instance it creates.
```

        * Reboot if required. (Usually required.)

>         * Visit the Microsoft Store and install the *updated* ["Windows Subsystem for Linux"](https://apps.microsoft.com/store/detail/windows-subsystem-for-linux/9P9TQF7MRM4R) and click "Open". It will likely prompt you for a username and password for the Ubuntu WSL2 instance it creates.

Author: I don't think it's safe to link so explicitly here, as they change things all the time. Better to search... Not sure if the link works with just https://apps.microsoft.com/store/detail/windows-subsystem-for-linux, which would be OK.

Author: Maybe it's OK after all. But not sure we'll ever know if it changes.

Reviewer: > Maybe it's OK after all. But not sure we'll ever know if it changes.

First of all, sorry for committing this when it wasn’t my place. The link seemed like an obvious win and I grabbed it without thinking.

Second, the Markdown link checker is pretty good complaining about broken links—so we should get a clue if/when the link stops working.

        
        If you prefer to use another Ubuntu distro, just install it and set it as default. For example, `wsl --set-default Ubuntu-22.04`.

    2. Visit the Microsoft Store and install the *updated* "Windows Subsystem for Linux", then click "Open". It will likely prompt you for a username and password for the Ubuntu WSL2 instance it creates.

    3. In "Windows Update Settings → Advanced Options" enable "Receive updates for other Microsoft products", and you may want to occasionally `wsl.exe --update` as well.

>     4. Install Docker Desktop. If you already have chocolatey, `choco install -y docker-desktop` or [download Docker Desktop from Docker](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop/).

Reviewer: Capitalize “Chocolatey” product name and _run_ the command.

```suggestion
    4. Install Docker Desktop. If you already have Chocolatey, run `choco install -y docker-desktop` or [download Docker Desktop from Docker](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop/).
```

>     5. Start Docker Desktop. You should now be able to do `docker ps` in PowerShell or Git Bash.

Reviewer: [Run](https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/latest/developers/writing-style-guide/#beginner-friendly-expert-compatible) commands.

```suggestion
    5. Start Docker Desktop. You should now be able to run `docker ps` in PowerShell or Git Bash.
```

    6. In `Docker Desktop -> Settings -> Resources -> WSL2 Integration` verify that Docker Desktop is integrated with your distro.

>     7. In an administrative `PowerShell` (5) run [this PowerShell script](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/drud/ddev/master/scripts/install_ddev_wsl2_docker_desktop.ps1) by executing:

Reviewer: Remove backticks from “PowerShell” so it’s consistent with the previous step, and remove `(5)` whose purpose is unclear. If it referenced step 5, it didn’t offer any perceived benefit—if anything we’d probably want to explain to someone how they’d even run an administrative PowerShell but I take it we assume the reader is comfortable with this.

```suggestion
    7. In an administrative PowerShell run [this PowerShell script](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/drud/ddev/master/scripts/install_ddev_wsl2_docker_desktop.ps1) by executing:
```

Author: Unfortunately, the new PowerShell promoted by MS as an aftermarket install does not work with this script, so the need is for PowerShell v5 (the built-in PowerShell).

Reviewer: Ohhh, okay. Then maybe `(5)` could be `(v5!)` to clarify it’s describing version number and that the docs are pointing it out with some urgency?

        ```powershell
        Set-ExecutionPolicy Bypass -Scope Process -Force; [System.Net.ServicePointManager]::SecurityProtocol = [System.Net.ServicePointManager]::SecurityProtocol -bor 3072; 
        iex ((New-Object System.Net.WebClient).DownloadString('https://raw.githubusercontent.com/drud/ddev/master/scripts/install_ddev_wsl2_docker_desktop.ps1'))
        ```

>     8. In "Windows Update Settings → Advanced Options" enable "Receive updates for other Microsoft products", and you may want to occasionally `wsl.exe --update` as well.

Reviewer: Same as previous suggestions, except that it’s step 8 here.

```suggestion
    8. In *Windows Update Settings* → *Advanced Options* enable *Receive updates for other Microsoft products*. You may want to occasionally run `wsl.exe --update` as well.
```

>     To upgrade DDEV in WSL2 Ubuntu, use `apt upgrade ddev` as described in the [Linux installation section](#linux).

Reviewer: Run commands.

```suggestion
    To upgrade DDEV in WSL2 Ubuntu, run `apt upgrade ddev` as described in the [Linux installation section](#linux).
```

    !!!note "Path to certificates"
        If you get the prompt `Installing to the system store is not yet supported on this Linux`, you may just need to add `/usr/sbin` to the `$PATH` so that `/usr/sbin/update-ca-certificates` can be found.

    ### Traditional Windows

>     It is possible to install DDEV in traditional Windows, and it works fine, but it’s massively than WSL2. Enable either [Mutagen](performance/#system-requirements) for the best performance if you have to use traditional Windows, but the best alternative is to install on WSL2.

Reviewer: Reiterate gently and use fewer words since we already addressed this above. (Also avoids “it’s massively than WSL2” typo/mystery.)

```suggestion
    If you must use traditional Windows without WSL2, you’ll probably want to enable [Mutagen](performance/#system-requirements) for the best performance.
```

    * If you use [Chocolatey](https://chocolatey.org/) (recommended), you can run `choco install ddev docker-desktop git` from an administrative shell. Upgrades are just `ddev poweroff && choco upgrade ddev`.
    * A Windows installer is provided in each [DDEV release](https://github.com/drud/ddev/releases) (`ddev_windows_installer.<version>.exe`). Run that and it will do the full installation for you. Open a new Git Bash or PowerShell or cmd window and start using DDEV.
    * Most people interact with DDEV on Windows using Git Bash, part of the [Windows Git suite](https://git-scm.com/download/win). Although DDEV does work with cmd and PowerShell, it's more at home in Bash. You can install it with Chocolatey using `choco install -y git`.

>     * For performance, many users enable Mutagen, `ddev config global --mutagen-enabled` (global) or `ddev config --mutagen-enabled` just for one project.

Reviewer: Omit this point since it’s also not an installation option and we started off this section with this exact information and a link for more detail and examples.

```suggestion
```
